---
title: About
image: 
image_alt:
layout: page
---

Modern humans have a unique and devastating capacity to modify the ecosystems within which we are imbedded. This capability is an integral part of many descriptions of what it means to be human, but it remains unclear when in the course of human evolutionary history we acquired this fundamental ability. Ecologists and conservation biologists frequently point to Homo erectus (first appearing around 2 million years ago) as the earliest hominin to fundamentally alter ecosystems, causing the extinction of other mammal species. However, the appearance of Homo erectus occurred at precisely the same time as eastern Africa was undergoing extensive grassland expansions driven by atmospheric changes, which may have also contributed to the observed mammal extinctions. We currently do not know to what extent our hominin ancestors were responsible for these ecosystem changes. Our project provides the first strong test of the ancient hominin impacts hypothesis.

The ancient hominin impacts hypothesis states that the large-brained and technologically sophisticated Homo erectus caused profound impacts on Pleistocene mammal communities, driving both large herbivore species and competing carnivore species to extinction. However, at the time Homo erectus first appeared, eastern Africa was experiencing climate-driven grassland expansions, which may also have contributed to extinctions in carnivores and herbivores. It is currently unknown whether environmental change, human impacts, or a combination of both best explains the observed Pleistocene mammal extinctions.

We test the hypothesis of ancient hominin impacts on ecosystems using a paleo food webs approach in the Koobi Fora Formation in Kenya, the site where Homo erectus first appears in the eastern African fossil record. First, we conduct anatomical and isotopic studies of the Koobi Fora carnivores (e.g., saber tooth cats and hyaena relatives) to determine which herbivore species each extinct carnivore would have eaten and to reveal which carnivores Homo erectus likely competed with. Next, we construct food webs and use an established modeling framework to conduct numerical experiments in order to predict the likely extinction impacts resulting from the introduction of a generalist predator (i.e., Homo erectus), climate-driven grassland expansion alone, and grassland expansion in conjunction with competition from Homo erectus. We compare the output of these modeling experiments to the observed record of mammal extinctions as a strong test of the ancient human impacts hypothesis.